.\" Manpage for hostnamed
.TH HOSTNAMED 8 "June 2026" "hostnamed" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
hostnamed \- D-Bus hostname management daemon for non-systemd Linux systems
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /usr/libexec/hostnamed
.RB [ \-\-debug ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hostnamed
is a standalone system daemon that implements the
.B org.freedesktop.hostname1
D-Bus interface using direct D-Bus activation, with no dependency on
.IR systemd .
It exposes the same hostname and machine-identity properties as
.BR systemd-hostnamed (8)
on systemd-based distributions, allowing desktop tools such as
.B gnome-control-center
to read and edit the system's hostname and related machine metadata on
systems that use
.B elogind
and a D-Bus/PolKit stack without systemd.
.PP
.B hostnamed
does not poll or hold any files open for writing on its own initiative.
Instead it watches its source files with
.BR inotify (7)
and re-reads them whenever they change, regardless of who changed them
\(em the bundled
.BR hostnamectl (1)
client, a hand edit, or any other tool. After a resync it emits
.B PropertiesChanged
on the D-Bus object for every property whose value actually changed.
.PP
.B hostnamed
is normally started on demand by D-Bus activation when a client first
calls a method or reads a property on the
.B org.freedesktop.hostname1
bus name. It can also be started manually for debugging.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Enable verbose debug logging to standard error in addition to syslog.
.SH "D-BUS INTERFACE"
.B hostnamed
registers the object
.B /org/freedesktop/hostname1
on the system bus, implementing the
.B org.freedesktop.hostname1
interface.
.SS Properties
All properties are read-only over D-Bus; values are changed via the
.B Set*
methods described below, or by editing the underlying files directly
(see
.BR FILES ),
which
.B hostnamed
picks up automatically.
.TP
.B Hostname \fR(s)
The transient hostname, as returned by
.BR gethostname (2).
.TP
.B StaticHostname \fR(s)
The hostname persisted to the static hostname file (see
.BR FILES ).
.TP
.B PrettyHostname \fR(s)
A human-readable, free-form display name for the machine, stored as
.B PRETTY_HOSTNAME
in
.IR /etc/machine-info .
Unlike
.BR StaticHostname ,
this value is not used for name resolution and may contain spaces and
mixed case. When
.B SetPrettyHostname
is called with a value that contains a dot \(em as happens when a
desktop shell populates both the static and pretty hostname from the
same text field \(em
.B hostnamed
keeps only the portion before the first dot, so the pretty name does
not end up as a dotted hostname.
.TP
.B DefaultHostname \fR(s)
The compiled-in or distribution default hostname, used when no static or
transient hostname is configured.
.TP
.B HostnameSource \fR(s)
One of
.RB ` static ',
.RB ` transient ',
or
.RB ` default ',
indicating which mechanism currently determines
.BR Hostname .
.TP
.B IconName \fR(s)
A freedesktop icon name (e.g.
.RB ` computer-desktop ',
.RB ` computer-laptop ')
describing the machine's form factor, taken from
.I /etc/machine-info
or derived from the SMBIOS chassis type when unset.
.TP
.B Chassis \fR(s)
A short chassis class string such as
.RB ` desktop ',
.RB ` laptop ',
.RB ` server ',
.RB ` tablet ',
or
.RB ` handset ',
taken from
.I /etc/machine-info
or derived from SMBIOS chassis-type data under
.IR /sys/class/dmi/id .
.TP
.B Deployment \fR(s)
A free-form deployment label (e.g.
.RB ` production ',
.RB ` staging '),
stored in
.IR /etc/machine-info .
.TP
.B Location \fR(s)
A free-form physical location string, stored in
.IR /etc/machine-info .
.TP
.B KernelName \fR(s)
The kernel name as reported by
.BR uname (2)
(typically
.RB ` Linux ').
.TP
.B KernelRelease \fR(s)
The kernel release string from
.BR uname (2).
.TP
.B KernelVersion \fR(s)
The kernel version string from
.BR uname (2).
.TP
.B OperatingSystemPrettyName \fR(s)
The
.B PRETTY_NAME
field from
.IR /etc/os-release .
.TP
.B OperatingSystemCPEName \fR(s)
The
.B CPE_NAME
field from
.IR /etc/os-release ,
if present.
.TP
.B OperatingSystemHomeURL \fR(s)
The
.B HOME_URL
field from
.IR /etc/os-release ,
if present.
.TP
.B HardwareVendor \fR(s)
The system board vendor, read from
.IR /sys/class/dmi/id/board_vendor .
.TP
.B HardwareModel \fR(s)
The system product name, read from
.IR /sys/class/dmi/id/product_name .
.TP
.B FirmwareVersion \fR(s)
The BIOS/firmware version string, read from
.IR /sys/class/dmi/id/bios_version .
.TP
.B FirmwareDate \fR(t)
The BIOS/firmware release date, expressed as a
.B uint64
count of microseconds since the UNIX epoch (UTC), per the
.B org.freedesktop.hostname1
interface specification. The value is parsed from the
.RB ` MM/DD/YYYY '
date string in
.IR /sys/class/dmi/id/bios_date .
If the source date is absent or cannot be parsed, this property is set
to
.BR UINT64_MAX .
.SS Methods
.TP
.B SetHostname(s name, b interactive)
Sets the transient hostname via
.BR sethostname (2).
Requires the
.B org.freedesktop.hostname1.set-hostname
PolKit action.
.TP
.B SetStaticHostname(s name, b interactive)
Writes
.I name
to the static hostname file (see
.BR FILES )
and updates the transient hostname to match. Passing an empty string
removes the static hostname file. Requires the
.B org.freedesktop.hostname1.set-static-hostname
PolKit action.
.TP
.B SetPrettyHostname(s name, b interactive)
Writes
.I name
as
.B PRETTY_HOSTNAME
in
.IR /etc/machine-info ,
after stripping any trailing dotted domain suffix (see
.B PrettyHostname
above). Requires the
.B org.freedesktop.hostname1.set-machine-info
PolKit action.
.TP
.B SetIconName(s name, b interactive)
Writes
.I name
as
.B ICON_NAME
in
.IR /etc/machine-info .
Requires
.BR org.freedesktop.hostname1.set-machine-info .
.TP
.B SetChassis(s name, b interactive)
Writes
.I name
as
.B CHASSIS
in
.IR /etc/machine-info .
Requires
.BR org.freedesktop.hostname1.set-machine-info .
.TP
.B SetDeployment(s name, b interactive)
Writes
.I name
as
.B DEPLOYMENT
in
.IR /etc/machine-info .
Requires
.BR org.freedesktop.hostname1.set-machine-info .
.TP
.B SetLocation(s name, b interactive)
Writes
.I name
as
.B LOCATION
in
.IR /etc/machine-info .
Requires
.BR org.freedesktop.hostname1.set-machine-info .
.TP
.B GetProductUUID(b interactive) \(-> ay
Returns the DMI product UUID, read from
.IR /sys/class/dmi/id/product_uuid ,
as a byte array.
.TP
.B GetHardwareSerial(b interactive) \(-> s
Returns the DMI chassis serial number, read from
.IR /sys/class/dmi/id/chassis_serial .
.TP
.B Describe() \(-> s
Returns a single JSON object containing the current value of every
property listed above, for clients that prefer one bulk read over
individual property gets. Not used by the bundled
.BR hostnamectl (1)
client, which reads the underlying files directly instead.
.PP
For every method that takes an
.I interactive
argument, a value of
.B true
indicates the caller is willing to wait for a PolKit authentication
dialog to be presented by the user's session PolKit agent; a value of
.B false
indicates the call should fail immediately with
.B org.freedesktop.DBus.Error.AuthFailed
unless the caller is already authorized.
.SH AUTHORIZATION
Access to the
.B Set*
and
.B Get*
(UUID/serial) methods over D-Bus is controlled by
.BR polkit (8)
using the following actions, declared in
.IR /usr/share/polkit-1/actions/org.freedesktop.hostname1.policy :
.TP
.B org.freedesktop.hostname1.set-hostname
.TQ
.B org.freedesktop.hostname1.set-static-hostname
.TQ
.B org.freedesktop.hostname1.set-machine-info
.PP
By default these actions require
.B auth_admin
for inactive or remote callers and
.B auth_admin_keep
for an active local session, matching upstream
.BR systemd-hostnamed (8)
policy. A PolKit rule installed at
.I /usr/share/polkit-1/rules.d/org.freedesktop.hostname1.rules
additionally grants unconditional access to members of the privileged
group selected at build time (default
.RB ` wheel ',
see the
.B privileged-group
meson option), so desktop session tools are not prompted for a password
on every edit. Group membership changes only take effect for new login
sessions; a user added to the privileged group must log out and back in
before
.B hostnamed
will recognize the new membership.
.PP
These PolKit actions govern D-Bus callers only. The bundled
.BR hostnamectl (1)
client bypasses D-Bus entirely and writes the underlying files
directly, so its own authorization is the ordinary Unix file
permissions on those files (in practice, it requires root for every
subcommand except
.BR status ).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/HOSTNAME
Default path for the static hostname file (Slackware convention; the
build-time
.B HOSTNAME
meson option, exposed in code as
.BR HOSTNAME_FILE ,
may point this elsewhere, e.g.
.I /etc/hostname
on other distributions). Watched with
.BR inotify (7).
.TP
.I /etc/machine-info
Stores
.BR PRETTY_HOSTNAME ", " ICON_NAME ", " CHASSIS ", " DEPLOYMENT ", "
and
.B LOCATION
as shell-style
.B KEY="value"
assignments. Rewritten atomically (temporary file plus rename) on every
write, by either
.B hostnamed
itself or
.BR hostnamectl (1).
Watched with
.BR inotify (7).
.TP
.I /etc/os-release
Read for
.BR PRETTY_NAME ", " CPE_NAME ", "
and
.BR HOME_URL .
Not written by
.BR hostnamed .
.TP
.I /sys/class/dmi/id/chassis_type
.TQ
.I /sys/class/dmi/id/chassis_serial
.TQ
.I /sys/class/dmi/id/board_vendor
.TQ
.I /sys/class/dmi/id/product_name
.TQ
.I /sys/class/dmi/id/product_uuid
.TQ
.I /sys/class/dmi/id/bios_version
.TQ
.I /sys/class/dmi/id/bios_date
SMBIOS/DMI sysfs nodes read for hardware and firmware identification.
Any node that does not exist or cannot be read is treated as empty.
.TP
.I /usr/share/polkit-1/actions/org.freedesktop.hostname1.policy
PolKit action declarations and default authorization requirements.
.TP
.I /usr/share/polkit-1/rules.d/org.freedesktop.hostname1.rules
PolKit rule granting the configured privileged group unconditional
access to all three hostname1 actions.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR hostnamectl (1),
.BR machine-info (5),
.BR os-release (5),
.BR polkit (8),
.BR pkcheck (1),
.BR sethostname (2),
.BR inotify (7)
.SH AUTHOR
Nathaniel Russell <naterussell83@gmail.com>
.SH LICENSE
This program is free software, distributed under the GNU General Public
License, version 2 or later. See the source for copying conditions.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at
.UR https://github.com/nater1983/hostnamed
.UE .
