.\" Manpage for hostnamectl (hostnamed bash client)
.TH HOSTNAMECTL 1 "June 2026" "hostnamed" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
hostnamectl \- control the system hostname and related machine metadata
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hostnamectl
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.IR COMMAND " [" ARGUMENT ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hostnamectl
is a Bash client used to query and change the system's static, transient,
and pretty hostnames, along with related machine metadata such as the
icon name, chassis type, deployment environment, and location.
.PP
Unlike a typical D-Bus client,
.B hostnamectl
writes directly to
.I /etc/HOSTNAME
(or
.I /etc/hostname
if the former does not exist) and
.IR /etc/machine-info .
The
.B hostnamed
daemon watches these files with
.BR inotify (7)
and automatically updates its
.B org.freedesktop.hostname1
D-Bus properties and emits
.B PropertiesChanged
signals whenever they are modified, whether by
.B hostnamectl
or by any other tool. This means
.B hostnamectl
itself never talks to D-Bus or PolKit; it relies on ordinary file
permissions, and most subcommands simply require root.
.PP
On first run as root, if
.I /etc/machine-info
does not yet exist,
.B hostnamectl
creates it automatically, deriving an initial chassis and icon name from
SMBIOS data under
.I /sys/class/dmi/id
and an initial pretty hostname from the static hostname file. An existing
.I /etc/machine-info
is never overwritten by this bootstrap step.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B status
Show the current hostname and machine information in human-readable form.
This is the default command when none is given. Fields are only printed
when a value is available; for example the pretty hostname, deployment,
location, firmware fields, and virtualization line are omitted entirely
if empty or undetectable. The transient hostname is only shown when it
differs from the static hostname.
.TP
.BI set-hostname " [--static|--transient|--pretty] NAME"
Set the system hostname. With no mode flag, all three forms are updated
at once: the static hostname file and the transient hostname (via the
.BR hostname (1)
command) are both set to
.IR NAME ,
and the pretty hostname is set to
.I NAME
with any domain suffix stripped (the portion before the first dot).
.RS
.TP
.B --static
Update only the static hostname file.
.TP
.B --transient
Update only the running kernel's hostname via
.BR hostname (1),
without touching any file.
.TP
.B --pretty
Update only the pretty hostname in
.IR /etc/machine-info .
Unlike the other modes, the value is not validated as a DNS-style
hostname, since pretty names are free-form and may contain spaces.
.RE
.TP
.BI set-icon-name " NAME"
Set the freedesktop icon name (for example
.BR computer-laptop )
used to represent this machine in graphical tools. Stored as
.B ICON_NAME
in
.IR /etc/machine-info .
.TP
.BI set-chassis " TYPE"
Set the chassis type. Must be one of:
.BR desktop ", " laptop ", " server ", " tablet ", " handset ", "
.BR watch ", " embedded ", " vm ", " container ", or " convertible .
Stored as
.B CHASSIS
in
.IR /etc/machine-info .
.TP
.BI set-deployment " ENVIRONMENT"
Set a free-form deployment label, for example
.BR production " or " staging .
Stored as
.B DEPLOYMENT
in
.IR /etc/machine-info .
.TP
.BI set-location " LOCATION"
Set a free-form physical location string. Stored as
.B LOCATION
in
.IR /etc/machine-info .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -h ", " --help
Show a short usage summary and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Show the current status:
.PP
.RS
.EX
hostnamectl status
.EE
.RE
.PP
Rename the machine entirely (static, transient, and pretty hostnames):
.PP
.RS
.EX
hostnamectl set-hostname web01.example.net
.EE
.RE
.PP
Give the machine a friendly display name without changing its network
hostname:
.PP
.RS
.EX
hostnamectl set-hostname --pretty "Nathan's Desktop"
.EE
.RE
.PP
Change only the running kernel's hostname, leaving the configured static
hostname untouched until the next reboot:
.PP
.RS
.EX
hostnamectl set-hostname --transient temphost
.EE
.RE
.PP
Mark a machine as part of staging:
.PP
.RS
.EX
hostnamectl set-deployment staging
.EE
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns 0 on success and 1 on error (for example, an invalid hostname,
an invalid chassis type, a missing argument, or insufficient
permissions).
.SH AUTHORIZATION
All subcommands other than
.B status
require root. There is no PolKit prompt or D-Bus round trip in
.B hostnamectl
itself; the daemon's PolKit policy governs only direct D-Bus callers
such as
.BR gnome-control-center (1).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/HOSTNAME
Static hostname file, used in preference to
.I /etc/hostname
when present.
.TP
.I /etc/hostname
Fallback static hostname file, used only if
.I /etc/HOSTNAME
does not exist.
.TP
.I /etc/machine-info
Stores the pretty hostname, icon name, chassis, deployment, and location
as shell-style
.B KEY="value"
assignments. Rewritten atomically (temporary file plus rename) on every
write. Created automatically on first root invocation if missing.
.TP
.I /etc/os-release
Read for the operating system's pretty name and CPE name when displaying
.BR status .
Not modified by
.BR hostnamectl .
.TP
.I /etc/machine-id
Read for the machine ID shown in
.BR status .
Not modified by
.BR hostnamectl .
.TP
.I /sys/class/dmi/id/*
SMBIOS/DMI sysfs nodes read for chassis detection, virtualization
detection, and the hardware vendor, model, firmware version, and
firmware date fields shown in
.BR status .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR hostnamed (8),
.BR machine-info (5),
.BR os-release (5),
.BR hostname (1),
.BR inotify (7)
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Nathaniel Russell.
.PP
Part of the
.B hostnamed
project, a non-systemd implementation of the
.B org.freedesktop.hostname1
D-Bus interface for Slackware Linux.
.SH LICENSE
This program is free software, distributed under the GNU General Public
License, version 2 or later. See the source for copying conditions.
